from students' essays
his thoughts tumbled in his head, making and breaking alliances like underpants in a washing machine.
the little boat slowly drifted across the pond in exactly the same way a bowling ball wouldn't.
john and mary had never met. they were like two humming-birds who had also never met.
she had a deep, throaty laugh, like the sound a dog makes just before it throws up.
the red brick wall was the colour of a brick-red crayon.
he was deeply in love.  when she spoke, he thought he heard bells, as if she were a truck reversing.
he fell twelve storeys and hit the pavement like a paper bag filled with vegetable soup.
he was as lame as a duck.  not the metaphorical lame duck, but a real duck that was actually lame.  maybe from stepping on a landmine or something.
granddad had a mind like a steel trap - one that had been left out so long it had rusted shut.
disappearing languages
some linguists complain about the unprecedented disappearance of minority languages throughout the world.  the phenomenon is compared with the recent mass extermination of animals.  although parallels undoubtedly exist, as a biologist i want to comment on important differences between these two phenomena.
we should accept that in general biological extinction represents a completely irretrievable loss of unique, sometimes beautiful or certainly interesting animals and consequently a decrease in biodiversity.  and biodiversity influences the stability of the ecosystem.
however when one discusses the diversity of languages that means only the one recognises the existence of various languages.  it would be difficult to support the idea that linguistic diversity would help the stability of anything at all.
if a language disappears, that doesn't mean that the human concepts and way of thinking disappear as well.
language inequality in international relations
any information about esperanto is pointless if the target group is unaware of the existence of linguistic inequality and the undemocratic nature of the present international linguistic order.
it follows that the first aim of information must be to reveal to the general public the fundamental lack of democracy in a communication system which gives lifelong privilege to some while demanding from others years of effort to acquire an imperfect knowledge of a particular language.
in attempting to start a discussion on linguistic inequality and language rights, many potential allies with similar aims can be found.
there are many scientific works on the effects of linguistic inequality at international, local and individual levels.
for those responsible for information, the subject is worth studying carefully.  to change reality it is first necessary to get to know it in depth.
diversity: opportunity or threat?
the world wide polemic about globalisation shows up the tension between two different concepts about our world. 
in the opinion of some, the integration of the world caused by advances in technology, particularly in communication, cannot be stopped:  the opening of markets, the creation of an ever larger class of educated people whose perspective extends beyond national boundaries, the gradual appearance of an internationalised culture and internationalised language, all of this is inevitable, even desirable.
ili krome asertas, ke la homoj havas rajton ĝui la propran kulturon, paroli la propran lingvon kaj vivi la propran vivon laŭ valoroj ne nepre similaj al tiuj de ĉiuj aliaj.
cats - a new therapy?
sonic communication from tigers and giraffes may be the new wave of alternative medicine.  a study from the usa, fauna communications, has proven that animals communicate infrasonically .  .
most interesting to some may be the finding that a cat's purr matches vibrations and frequencies that promote bone growth, healing of fractures, ligaments and torn muscles, reduction of swelling and alleviation of pain.
the larger of the felines emit strong harmonics said to generate muscle strength, increase joint mobility and relieve pain.  is this why they have nine lives?
scientists are looking for ways to incorporate these findings into therapies for osteoporosis and to promote bone growth in the elderly.
so, if you want a healthy old age, get a cat!
advice for translating songs
one should pay careful attention to each syllable having its own place in the music.  several syllables should not be twisted and forced together into a single note.  on the other hand, if in the original a syllable is sung over several notes, additional syllables can sometimes be added. 
in pop/rock music the use of syllables is often rather less rigid: the singer varies the number of syllables in musically identical places.  then the translator too can allow himself to play around with the number of syllables and not rigorously follow the capriciousness of the original..
with songs, one should first of all pay attention to the rhythm and rhyme. the content is less rigid. the same ideas can often be expressed with different words.
in songs, as far as possible one should use language which is used in normal prose. if that is obviously impossible, be aware that in songs the use of language can be more liberal than in ordinary situations.
no longer snow on kilimanjaro
the largest free-standing mountain in the world is losing its brilliant distinguishing feature by which it is recognised from afar.  since 1912 the ice cover at the top of the 5895 m tall, no longer active, volcano in northern tanzania has shrivelled from an area of 12 km2 to the present two square kilometres.
scientists view this as a global tendency.  in the past few years the many ice fields of the himalayas and across the andes as far as antarctica have been studied - and everywhere the ice is shrinking and regressing.  scientists think that global warming is to blame.
if the greenhouse effect strengthens the snow-cap on the tallest african mountain will have vaporised away by the year 2020. the air temperature will be so high that the ice will not only liquidise, but will sublime directly into water vapour.  that also explains the fact that in spite of the melting ice many rivers in the region are carrying less and less water or completely drying up.
dust
it moves relentlessly.  attack it, and it scatters and evades you, but the moment your guard is down, it silently regroups – on lampshades and ledges, in corners and crevices.  it charges out at you from under your bed.  no matter how often you shake a rag at it, dust always seems to have the upper hand.
and that’s just in your home. imagine having to look after a larger place, somewhere packed with delicate knick-knacks that are on show day after day, with tens of thousands of people passing through each year.  so vexing is the battle against dust that the people who run historic homes and palaces have made it the subject of systematic scientific scrutiny.
several studies launched in the past few years are attempting to put the study of dust on a scientific footing.  what is it composed of?  how quickly does it accumulate? how damaging is it?  and what is the best way of keeping it under control?
language and logic
a mathematically precise language presupposes:
a strictly unemotional prose style - no figurative use of words;
that each word should have just one meaning, strictly fixed within narrow limits;
constant, fixed order of words within the sentence.
science needs this kind of precise language and scientists subject the languages used by them to these demands. for science this is not only justifiable, but also necessary. but for art such a language cannot be suitable.
very early on zamenhof himself considered this question. this is how he saw the matter: "not only in natural languages, but also in an artificial language, everything used by the majority of good writers must be regarded as good, even if it is not absolutely logical, because if we always demand absolute logic, then the free use of an artificial language will become completely impossible, because the value of long practice will disappear and in the tenth year of using the language, just as in the first year, everyone would have to consider and weigh every word. 
for want of a dollar a year
it is a lethal agent that kills more children under the age of five than measles, malaria or aids.  in fact, across the developing world it is the fourth biggest cause of death and disease.  yet you have probably never heard of the problem.
...more than a third of humanity have to cook every day on traditional stoves that burn wood, crop residues or dung. and cooking smoke, like cigarette smoke, is a cocktail of poisons including carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides and carcinogens such as formaldehyde and benzene.  this explains why cooking smoke is thought to kill 1.6 million people every year, mostly women and young children. ....
 but they could afford a stove with a chimney that takes the smoke out of the house.  if the structure of the house makes a chimney impossible, a hood which takes the smoke up into the roof can be almost as good.
it is estimated that $2.5 billion a year for 12 years would provide 2 billion people with a healthy indoor environment - about $1 a person a year.
pretending to be stupid
it's said that this proverb, which means "to behave as if one doesn't understand anything", has a very amusing origin. after the crusades, when the first 'blacks'  came to venice for the first time, they were regarded in the same way that we would regard martians from our red planetary neighbour. it is understandable that their behaviour and way of dressing would make them objects of curiosity.
that increased to a real thirst for knowledge when the 'blacks' didn't understand a single word and pretended that they had no understanding of what was around them. however, this was just a trick which they used to gain more freedom to continue their trading.
is it possible that in a european union growing ever more closely integrated there exists a country which cunningly "pretends to be incapable, and so too stupid to learn any language other than that of its own country" so that other europeans would have to learn its language as "an international language spoken everywhere"?
stone age cats
until now, historians thought that the ancient egyptians were the first to domesticate cats around 4000 years ago. but some evidence suggests cats were culturally important outside egypt long before that.  stone and clay figurines of cats up to 10,000 years old have turned up in syria, turkey and israel.  and archeologists have found 9000 to 9500-year-old cat bones in cyprus, which has no native feline species.
people were keeping cats as pets almost 10,000 years ago, say researchers who stumbled on the grave of a prehistoric tabby in cyprus. the stone age cat lay close to the grave of a human, possibly its master.
the cat belonged to the species felis silvestris, the wild cat from which domestic cats are descended. its remains lie just 40 centimetres from a 9500-year-old human grave. the proximity of the human skeleton suggests the person had a stong bond with the cat, which might have been killed to go to the afterlife with its master.
polar bears
polar bears migrate throughout their entire lives, every day except when sleeping or resting: from the southern point of greenland upwards along the east coast, going beyond the north pole, across into siberia, then continuing into alaska. from there, across the islands situated near canada on again to southern greenland. they migrate over these enormous distances with the ice, on whose floes they travel.
they survive the winter by sleeping.  at the beginning of november polar bears dig themselves into a snow cave and become locked in by piles of snow.  the heat of the bear itself balances at a body temperature just above 0o celsius - not even the severest storm can reach or disturb it.  when the bears emerge in march from their snow dens, they are so thin that the people in northern regions believed for a long time that there were two species of white bear.
looking for lizards
between 1990 and 2002, the irish wildlife trust' conservation officer at the time, ferdia marnell, carried out the first survey of this unusual creature. working on reports from all but five counties, ferdia found out some very interesting things about 'lacerta vivipara'.  perhaps most importantly, he discovered that the lizard is more widespread than previously recorded.  
most records come from places where people were actively looking for lizards, which means that in places where there were no records there could still be lizards aplenty.  hence this current campaign of reptile-tracking.  we want to hear about as many places where these shy little lizards hang out as possible.  you are most likely to see lizards when they are basking on rocks, stone walls, logs or exposed sunny areas.  if you see one, send us the details location, type of habitat, nearby   plants, weather conditions, etc.
aids
why didn't aids spread throughout the world, and particularly throughout africa, in antiquity as it does now?  to explain that let us look at the publications of travellers of the 19th and 20th centuries.  from those works it becomes understandable that until the end of the 19th century the majority of regions in the african continent were almost isolated from each other. dangerous tropical jungles, torrential rivers, wide deserts, attacks by aggressive tribes etc. were obstacles to migration.
but the most important barriers were the many epidemic diseases: malaria, dysentery, smallpox, yellow fever and others.  it's possible that in separate tropical regions the inhabitants became ill and died as a result of aids, but the absence of constant ties to other regions would prevent the spread of the infection....
in the 2nd half of the 20th century events occurred which could have accelerated the spread of aids.  the first was an explosion of migration.  according to unesco today around 100 million people live outside their homeland.
fire
it's hot, it makes you sweat and it's not curry.
previously considered somewhat frightening, the amazing red stuff has become man's best friend. people across the world use it for cooking and scaring off wild animals.
"there's nothing new about fire," said norris nik, president of the hearth trust.  "you can find it all over the place - bush fires, lightning strikes and volcanoes, for example.  but the breakthrough has been introducing it to the home." ....
"fire has lots of things going for it, the main one being that it gives us humans more control over our surroundings.  before, we depended on the sun for heat and light," enthused norris.  "now we can keep warm and dry wherever we are.  this not only spells an end to dark caves, but it means we can survive in cold places like eŭrope.  and if any ice age comes along we can just sit it out."
garlic 
although garlic is well known as a culinary herb, it has long had a merited reputation as a medicinal herb too.  originally native to siberia, garlic is now grown worldwide for food and medicine.  the value of garlic as a wound dressing and as a remedy for disorders of digestion has been established since ancient times.  it has antiseptic properties and has been used to treat both animals and humans.
the basis of its activity is thought to be a chemical compound called allicin, which is formed from a precursor called allin when the garlic clove is crushed or chewed.  however, it is thought that there may be up to one hundred other compounds in garlic that may contribute to its value.
allicin actively interferes with the enzyme pathways of bacteria and reduces their growth. these compounds also acts as a powerful anti-oxidant and have been hailed as significant anti-cancer agents.
photosynthesis
few innovations have had such profound
consequences for life as the ability to capture energy from sunlight.  photosynthesis has literally altered the planet, transforming the atmosphere and cooling earth in a protective shield against radiation.
without photosynthesis there would be little oxygen in the atmosphere, and no plants or animals - just microbes.
before photosynthesis, life consisted of single-celled microbes whose sources of energy were chemicals such as sulphur, iron and methane.  then a group of microbes developed the ability to capture energy from sunlight.  this early version used hydrogen sulphide and carbon dioxide as its starting ingredients, generating carbohydrates and sulphur as end products.
some time later a new type of photosynthesis evolved that used water, generating oxygen as a by-product.  in those early days oxygen was poisonous, but some microbes evolved the ability to tolerate it and then to use it as a new, more efficient energy-source.
rabies
today, according to information from the world health organisation, over 50 thousand people a year become ill and perish from rabies, in spite of the fact that sufficiently reliable means of preventing rabies exist.
the majority of them are inhabitants of africa, asia and latin america.
the majority of those who became ill did not turn to medical personnel after a bite from a rabid or unknown dog, or did so too late when it was not possible for antibodies to form after vaccination.
in some cases medical staff made serious mistakes, for example, applying just a vaccine to prevent rabies and not using the specific immunoglobulin, in spite of the fact that the victim had received a large number of bites.
in those cases the symptoms of disease often appear after a short incubation period.
it is therefore necessary to use, in addition to the vaccine, specific immunoglobulin containing existing antibodies.
three elephants
genetic tests have confirmed that african savannah and forest elephants should be considered separate species. the two animals look different and experts had previously argued that they should be classed as two species, not variations of the same one.
results of dna analysis support the argument that there are three species of elephant, two in africa and one in asia.
most african elephants seen on safari or in zoos are the savannah type, known as loxodonta africana, which has large ears and curving tusks.
the rarer forest or bush elephant, loxodonta cyclotis, is smaller with rounded ears, straighter, thinner tusks and a distinct head shape. it lives in densely forested areas of west africa and is much less commonly seen.
researchers from the us and kenya published the new findings in the journal 'science'.
diseases of the nervous system in the hundred aere wood
canadian doctors think that the teddy bear winnie-the-pooh suffers from attention-deficit disorder and hyperactivity. they are also disturbed by the little animal's obsessive behaviour and psychological attachment to eating in general, and eating honey in particular. such behaviour leads to obesity.
the authors wonder if the little bear is suffering from 'shaken cub' syndrome , the result of an ab­normal method of transport. christopher robin usually holds the pet by one stuffed arm and lets the bear's head hit the stairs.
the authors diagnosis for the donkey eeyore is depression caused by a shocking experience, in this case the amputation of his tail. they think that rabbit suffers from narcissism to a pathological degree.
they notice that the kangaroo kanga is a single parent who is unemployed and abnormally overprotective of her baby.
for each member of the group of animals the writers not only reveal the diagnosis, but also prescribe suitable treatment. 
concerning museums ...
in 1880 john ruskin wrote an article entitled 'a museum or picture gallery, its functions and its formations' stating:
"the first function of a museum ... is to give example of perfect order and perfect elegance ... to the disorderly and rude populace. everything in its own place ... nothing crowded, nothing unnecessary, nothing puzzling. therefore, once a room has been arranged, there must be no change to it ...
the original expenditure for building and fitting must be magnificent ... the current expenditure magnanimous; but a certain proportion of this current cost should be covered by small entrance fees, exacted, not for any miserly helping out of the floor- sweepers' salaries, but for the sake of the visitors themselves, that the rooms may not be encumbered by the idle, or disgraced by the disreputable.
you must not make your museum a refuge against rain or ennui, not let into the perfectly furnished ... palatial rooms, the utterly squalid and ill-bred portion of the people ..."
from guidelines for informa­tion about esperanto
aims : to make the public aware of the problems
any information about esperanto is pointless if the target group is unaware of the existence of linguistic inequality and the undemocratic nature of the present linguistic order.
it follows that the first aim of information must be to reveal to the general public the fundamental lack of democracy in a commu­nication system which gives life-long privilege to some while demanding from others years of effort to acquire an imperfect knowledge of a particular language.
in attempting to start a discussion on linguistic in­equality and language rights, many potential allies with simi­lar aims can be found. there are many scientific works on the ef­fects of linguistic inequality. at international, local and indi­vidual levels.
for those responsible for information, the subject is worth studying carefully. to change reality it is first neces­sary to get to know it in depth.
the most important colour
in the grey dawn of time perhaps the first colour which people of that time were aware of was that colour which they could smell and taste: the colour of greed, of a slain wild animal, of the triumph of a hunt, of life and death, of conquest and food, the colour of blood - red!
but blood quickly becomes brownish, consequently a replacement was immediately looked for and found: ochre. it does not become discoloured, is not edible, can't be used to warm oneself - and it is close to red.
red  is the ori­gin of sanctity, is magic, a symbol of strength and power, strengthens the dead - and at the same time prevents their return to earth.
up to 10kg of red ochre  was buried with them. 40000 yearsago the first art galleries were dug and animated by ochre, and 10000 years ago ochre became the first substance to be traded by man.
ethnologue
ethnologue is the name of the big­gest  encyclopedia of languages in the world. it has information on 7299 languages, of which 6912 are living.
the newest, 15th, edition can be freely consulted on the internet:.
the work contains a mass of inter­esting facts. for example, we get to know that of those 6912 living languages, 2269 originate in asia, 2092 in africa, 1310 in oceania, 1002 in america and only 239 in europe.
eight languages have more than 100 million native speakers, 24 languages have fewer than ten speakers. the state with the most languages is papua newguinea where 820 languages are spoken. it is followed by india with 742 and nigeria with 516 languages.
there are several lines of descrip­tion for each language. we read where it is spoken, how many peo­ple speak it, how many dialects it has and what they are called, how it is classified, and much more.
moreover, the work explains why it is called a 'language' and not a 'dialect'. reasons can be, for example, that dictionaries and encyclopaedias exist, radio stations use it, the bible has been translated into it, etc.
almroth wright
the name alexander fleming is known throughout the world, but that of the man who was his chief and friend of 40 years is less familiar.
almroth wright was born in middleton tyre in yorkshire, the son of an irish presbyterian minister and a swedish mother whose father was governor of the royal mint in stockholm.
the family came to ireland when he was quite young. he was taught mainly by private tutors who seem to have done a very good job. he was fluent in several languages and could quote a quarter of a million lines of poetry.
he considered literature and law as careers but was advised to persist with his medical studies. he qualified in 1883 ....
in 1902 he became professor of pathology at st. mary's hospital, where he was to rule for 45 years, starting in one small, ill-equipped room ....
in 1906 alexander fleming joined the hospital. the relationship between the two men was good and wright gave fleming full credit for his work and findings.
80. the drawings at nazca
the gigantic cornplex of drawings on the earth at nazca, peru, are a unique phenomenon. the drawings have become famous throughout the world because of their size, variety and quantity.
although such drawings are known in other parts of the world, only in nazca was so much energy invested over many generations to draw hundreds of lines and shapes.
the village of nazca is found in the desert plain between the pacific ocean and the andes. here and there rivers flow through the desert steppes and take water from the snowy peaks of the andes to the ocean.
in the first millenium prehistoric cultures were active in the valleys beside these rivers. the nazca culture, which created the giant drawings existed between the 3rd and 9th centuries.
under the lnca empire ancient traditions disappeared. as a consequence, and because of the lack of writing, the source and aim of the drawings remain a mystery
robotic hand
japanese scientists from the atr computational neuroscience laboratories in kioto have produced a robotic hand controlled only by the thoughts of the user. the hand imitates the movement of a natural hand by means of real-time analysis of brain activity.
people taking part in the experiment made 'stone, paper or scissors' shape with the right hand. a scanner recorded the corresponding brain activity by measuring blood flow in the brain.
the information was forwarded to a computer which controlled the robotic hand. after a short period of training, the computer could associate the brain activity with the shape being made.
when the person made a fist  the computer instructed the robotic hand to do the same, using only the signals from the brain.
although the method works slowly and is expensive, it represents an important milestone in the construction of prostheses controlled by the thoughts of the user.
academies and languages
ancient academies were meeting places for open discussion and the transmission of knowledge. more recent academies partly continue that tradition but have become more specialised in particular sciences and arts.
several academies were founded in florence during the rule of the medici family, among them the academia platonica , the accademia degli umidi , and the most famous of them the accadeia della crusca  which specialised in the tuscan-italian written language and became a model for similar organisations elsewhere in europe, for example the 'sprachpflege' groups in germany.
it is interesting to compare the working principles of the accademia della crusca with
another famous european authority, the academie francais. planned languages users have also created their own linguistic societies and academics, whose aims are not always the same.
let us look at the history and aims of the volapuk academy, the interlingua academy, the academy of esperanto and several others.
euro notes in belgium
according to the web-page www.eurobilltracker.com. a multilingual site, including esperanto, founded in 2002 to observe the movement of euro notes in the european union, at the beginning of july 2007 only 17.3% of euro notes in circulation in belgium were printed there, so really belgian.
since the introduction of the euro some years ago the percentage has constantly fallen. in january 2002 80% of notes were still belgian. one year later that percentage had already fallen to 50%.
according to eurotracker the percentage of spanish notes is almost as large as the percentage of belgian notes: 16.5%.
apart from those, german , french , italian  and finnish  notes are often in circulation. less frequently austrian , irish  and greek  notes appear.
the web page allows members to record the notes which they have and also to check in which countries the notes have previously been used.
eastern astronomy
chinese astronomy is one of the two most ancient mappings of the sky , and certainly the most long-lasting.
the earliest recorded eclipse of the sun was noted in china, in 2136 bc. chinese astronomical observations are uninterrupted for the last three millennia.
the chinese calendar is nearly four thousand years old, and like the hebrew calendar it is a combination of lunar and solar calendars, based on precise astronomical observations. chinese astronomers did not register just regular phenomena, but also rare events such as comets and super-novae, one of which was the famous supernova in the crab nebula in 1054, which was not mentioned in european sources.
whilst in the dark ages the development of european astronomy was halted by the church, it blossomed in china, and later on in korea and japan.
salt
salts are ionic compounds which contain any negative ion except an hydroxyl ion  and any positive ion except a hydrogen ion .
many salts are found in nature and myriads of others have been prepared in the laboratory. sodium chloride , cooking or table salt, is probably the best known of all salts. it is also the most frequent1y used salt, often used in cookery to improve the flavour or preserve food.
it is not good for the health to eat too much sodium, because that can make your blood pressure too high. you can replace sodium salt with a version which contains potassium but which tastes similar because it still contains chloride.
you can eat up to six grams of sodium daily, but many people eat more because a large amount is present in ready made foods. to avoid eating too much salt it is simplest to cook yourself, in that way you can control whether to add salt.
banana-shaped banana
it always looks the same and always tastes the same ­nevertheless we don't want to do without our cavendish-type banana. it is generally the most traded species on a global scale.
it is currently doubly endangered. in the malay archipelago, indonesia and australia whole plantations have already been wiped out because of a mould causing 'panama-disease type 4' which infects the roots of the banana planto.
pesticides don't help at ali. although this disease has not yet reached central america or the caribbean - only a matter or time - the mould 'blacksignature' is already spreading there.
experts believe that cavendish bananas will disappear in the next eight years. this problem has happened before. in 1960 a mould wiped out the then dominant variety grosmichel.
old people will certainly remember that bananas then were sweeter. and the next one-shape one-type one-taste banana?
temperature rise in the tyrol
the austrian organisation for media protection global 2000 presented an alarming forecast of the climate in the tyrol up to 2100. the research shows that in the alpine region the consequence of warming will be very serious.
the alps react very sensitively to global climate change and therefore could be treated as an 'early warning system'. according to the forecast in the coming decades summers and autumns will be three degrees warmer.
summers will be dryer but winters will experience more precipitation. at heights below 2000 m it will not snow, only rain. in the winter it will rain up to 30% more than now. by the end of the century all glaciers in austria will have melted.
floods and avalanches in the high mountains will occur more often. the warming will also have an effect on energy production: hydroelectric power stations will face serious problems. there will be less water because of the dry summers.
if we don't take care the energy system will be ruined.
laughter
it' s well known that laughter reduces mental stress and strengthens the body's immunity. however, how many laughs are necessary for good health?
professor kimura jooji of kansai university, japan, has begun to explore the secret of laughter.
until now attention has only been paid to the expression and voice of the person laughing, but kimura studied the movements of the diaphragm. through experiments he found that when one laughs wholeheartedly the diaphragm shakes. profiting from this discovery he invented a portable laugh-measurer which he will be able to sell until the end of the year.
he says "many people are too conscious of their health, taking medicines and worrying about blood-pressure and glucose". however, it's not those things we should be measuring, but the number of laughs.
according to the professor one should say to oneself " today i'm short of 500 ah . i should enjoy some funny stories and laugh".
the blue miracle
in northern tanzania between lake victoria and the serengeti nature reserve, is a group of five villages called 'salama' .
people there live in poverty. women get water from pools kilometres away. there are several hundred orphans without any livelihood.
the village leader, mramba samba, speaks esperanto and tried to use his contacts with europe to improve living conditions for the 14500 villagers. in 2008 he visited europe to look for support for the regional project 'mazingira' - a swahili word meaning: media, nature conservation - which organises the construction of wells and schools, collects money for micro-credit and takes care of orphans.
in the southern german town augsburg several thousand euro were collected for the project. with the donated money they could buy, among other things, equipment for drilling wells. a well previously cost €6000. now, drilling it themselves, they need a little less than €800
artistic future
three world famous architects took part in a competition for a project to build a new cultural centre in the lithuanian capital vilnius. the centre would be a branch of the new york guggenheim museum of modern art and the saint petersburg hermitage.
it would house not only exhibitions from those museums, but also the jonas mekas art centre , a cultural centre for lithuanian jews, a youth education centre and two cinemas for non-commercial films.
an international commission decided that the hest project was that of british architect z.hadid. her most famous works are the transport museum in glasgow, the aquatics centre for the 2012 olympic games in london, the museum of 21st century arts in rome and the guggenheim museum in taiwan
proportional result
a general election took place in albania 28th june. instead of a straight majority system they used a new system of election, proportional-regional, which had been approved in february.
the previous majority system aimed to reduce the number of parliamentary parties, but provoked strong protests. it particularly angered the socialist movement for integration, led by ilir meta, which five years ago split from the socialist party led by edi rama, mayor of tirana.
as expected, the result was complicated. the rightwing democratic coalition gained 70 of 140 seats, so equalled the leftwing coalition.
therefore the socialist movement for integration, with four seats, accepted the proposal from sali berisha, current democratic prime minister, to jointly form a new government.
thus the political crisis was solved and for the first time the new government, approved by the new parliament early in september, will have members from the right and the left.
the kingfisher
it is regarded as a "flying jewel". but it's not only its beautifully multicoloured plumage which attracts attention; the sparrow-sized bird is extraordinaryin other respects too.
it doesn't lay eggs in a nest, but in metre­long tunnel of earth, and swift as lightning it catches fish although it can't swim.
the kingfisher is one of the few birds which catch prey underwater although, unlike the cormorant, it can't swim.
it can fish even in swift flowing water, and its immersion is helped by the very dense structure of its plumage. its german name eisvogel  in no way refers to a preference for snow or ice. very cold water is fatal for the bird because it can't fish in it.
the name might come from the old-german eisen which means brilliant, scintillating, or from eisenfarbig  because of its blue back and rust-coloured chest feathers.
worldwide there are over 100 species, but only one lives in germany alcedo atthis.
current crisis
60 million people in 18 of the 26 brazilian states suffered a blackout when the electricity system failed, 10th november 2009.
the blackout lasted up to seven hours, depending on locality, and was caused by a breakdown at itaipu, the largest hydroelectric power station in the world. the power station operates on the river parana which flows from east to west in the southem region of brazil.
with 18 generators, itaipu provi des a quarter of ali the electricity used in brazil, and almost ali of that used in paraguay, which was also greatly affected by the breakdown ....
the brazilian minister of mines and energy said that bad weather in the region of the power station had caused the catastrophe. lightning strikes there could damage delicate equipment. however, for no particular reason, some thought it was an attack on the power station's computer system.
there was no lack of jokes that the station was then under the control of homer simpson, the bungler of usa animation film.
concerning museums ...
in 1880 john ruskin wrote an article entitled 'a museum or picture gallery, its functions and its formations' stating:
"the first function of a museum ... is to give example of perfect order and perfect elegance ... to the disorderly and rude populace. everything in its own place ... nothing crowded, nothing unnecessary, nothing puzzling. therefore, once a room has been arranged, there must be no change to it ...
the original expenditure for building and fitting must be magnificent ... the current expenditure magnanimous; but a certain proportion of this current cost should be covered by small entrance fees, exacted, not for any miserly helping out of the floor- sweepers' salaries, but for the sake of the visitors themselves, that the rooms may not be encumbered by the idle, or disgraced by the disreputable.
you must not make your museum a refuge against rain or ennui, not let into the perfectly furnished ... palatial rooms, the utterly squalid and ill-bred portion of the people ..."
for want of a dollar a year
it is a lethal agent that kills more children under the age of five than measles, malaria or aids.  in fact, across the developing world it is the fourth biggest cause of death and disease.  yet you have probably never heard of the problem.
...more than a third of humanity have to cook every day on traditional stoves that burn wood, crop residues or dung. and cooking smoke, like cigarette smoke, is a cocktail of poisons including carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides and carcinogens such as formaldehyde and benzene.  this explains why cooking smoke is thought to kill 1.6 million people every year, mostly women and young children. ....
but they could afford a stove with a chimney that takes the smoke out of the house.  if the structure of the house makes a chimney impossible, a hood which takes the smoke up into the roof can be almost as good.
it is estimated that $2.5 billion a year for 12 years would provide 2 billion people with a healthy indoor environment - about $1 a person a year.
looking for lizards
between 1990 and 2002, the irish wildlife trust' conservation officer at the time, ferdia marnell, carried out the first survey of this unusual creature. working on reports from all but five counties, ferdia found out some very interesting things about 'lacerta vivipara'.  perhaps most importantly, he discovered that the lizard is more widespread than previously recorded.  
most records come from places where people were actively looking for lizards, which means that in places where there were no records there could still be lizards aplenty.  hence this current campaign of reptile-tracking.  we want to hear about as many places where these shy little lizards hang out as possible.  you are most likely to see lizards when they are basking on rocks, stone walls, logs or exposed sunny areas.  if you see one, send us the details location, type of habitat, nearby   plants, weather conditions, etc.
fire
it's hot, it makes you sweat and it's not curry.
previously considered somewhat frightening, the amazing red stuff has become man's best friend. people across the world use it for cooking and scaring off wild animals.
"there's nothing new about fire," said norris nik, president of the hearth trust.  "you can find it all over the place - bush fires, lightning strikes and volcanoes, for example.  but the breakthrough has been introducing it to the home." ....
"fire has lots of things going for it, the main one being that it gives us humans more control over our surroundings.  before, we depended on the sun for heat and light," enthused norris.  "now we can keep warm and dry wherever we are.  this not only spells an end to dark caves, but it means we can survive in cold places like eŭrope.  and if any ice age comes along we can just sit it out."
the drawings at nazca
the gigantic cornplex of drawings on the earth at nazca, peru, are a unique phenomenon. the drawings have become famous throughout the world because of their size, variety and quantity.
although such drawings are known in other parts of the world, only in nazca was so much energy invested over many generations to draw hundreds of lines and shapes.
the village of nazca is found in the desert plain between the pacific ocean and the andes. here and there rivers flow through the desert steppes and take water from the snowy peaks of the andes to the ocean.
in the first millenium prehistoric cultures were active in the valleys beside these rivers. the nazca culture, which created the giant drawings existed between the 3rd and 9th centuries.
under the lnca empire ancient traditions disappeared. as a consequence, and because of the lack of writing, the source and aim of the drawings remain a mystery
the blue miracle
in northern tanzania between lake victoria and the serengeti nature reserve, is a group of five villages called 'salama' .
people there live in poverty. women get water from pools kilometres away. there are several hundred orphans without any livelihood.
the village leader, mramba samba, speaks esperanto and tried to use his contacts with europe to improve living conditions for the 14500 villagers. in 2008 he visited europe to look for support for the regional project 'mazingira' - a swahili word meaning: media, nature conservation - which organises the construction of wells and schools, collects money for micro-credit and takes care of orphans.
in the southern german town augsburg several thousand euro were collected for the project. with the donated money they could buy, among other things, equipment for drilling wells. a well previously cost €6000. now, drilling it themselves, they need a little less than €800
the kingfisher
it is regarded as a "flying jewel". but it's not only its beautifully multicoloured plumage which attracts attention; the sparrow-sized bird is extraordinaryin other respects too.
it doesn't lay eggs in a nest, but in metre­long tunnel of earth, and swift as lightning it catches fish although it can't swim.
the kingfisher is one of the few birds which catch prey underwater although, unlike the cormorant, it can't swim.
it can fish even in swift flowing water, and its immersion is helped by the very dense structure of its plumage. its german name eisvogel  in no way refers to a preference for snow or ice. very cold water is fatal for the bird because it can't fish in it.
the name might come from the old-german eisen which means brilliant, scintillating, or from eisenfarbig  because of its blue back and rust-coloured chest feathers.
worldwide there are over 100 species, but only one lives in germany alcedo atthis.
current crisis
60 million people in 18 of the 26 brazilian states suffered a blackout when the electricity system failed, 10th november 2009.
the blackout lasted up to seven hours, depending on locality, and was caused by a breakdown at itaipu, the largest hydroelectric power station in the world. the power station operates on the river parana which flows from east to west in the southern region of brazil.
with 18 generators, ltaipu provides a quarter of all the electricity used in brazil, and almost all of that used in paraguay, which was also greatly affected by the breakdown ....
the brazilian minister of mines and energy said that bad weather in the region of the power station had caused the catastrophe. lightning strikes there could damage delicate equipment. however, for no particular reason, some thought it was an attack on the power station's computer system.
there was no lack of jokes that the station was then under the control of homer simpson, the botcher in the us animation series.
honey
new zealand honey is more effective against bacteria than antibiotics.
australian scientists have discovered that even the feared hospital multi­resistant "super bacilli" perish when they come into contact with honey from the flowers of the manuka tea tree from new zealand.
the antibiotics in general use are becoming less and less effective because the microbes quickly evolve defence mechanisms. in the manuka honey a breakdown product from sugar  strongly stresses the bacteria before they can develop any resistance.
the discovery has increased the application of medicinal honey as an alternative to antibiotics. it is traded by the new zealand natural medicines company comovita under the brand name medihoney, and is already being used in the children's clinic at the university in bonn, germany.
comovita now wants to widen its product range to include a gel and plasters containing honey.
braille
in the paris "institute for the blind", founded in 1784 as the first such organisation in the world, the young louis braille learned to read in a complicated manner using letters in relief, but he himself couldn't write anything.
so he was all the more enthusiastic when one day captain charles barbier visited the school to present a kind of "night writing".
in order to give commands to soldiers on dark nights unnoticed by the enemy, he had invented a complicated syllabic writing using dots and lines.
as if possessed, louis worked for three years to simplify that system and make it useful and practical.
in the year 1825 the basic form of the "writing for the blind", which today bears the name of braille, was ready. it codifies each letter with just six dots which can be impressed onto paper using a stylus, typewriter or computer, in such a way that they can then be felt by the fingertips.
impress : technical term - give definitive form to an item  by pressing it very forcefully between a die and stamp.
100 - a new political era
after 60 years, britain again has a coalition government. the general election, which took place in may, did not give a parliamentary majority to either the ruling labour party or the main opposition conservative party.
there followed four days of discussion, conjecture, proposals and counter- proposals, until it was finally announced that the new government would consist of a coalition between the conservative and liberal democrat parties.
in many european countries elections which don't result in clear one-party government are the norm. so are coalitions.
in britain however, for more than half a century - apart from some informal agreements ­ either the labour or conservative party has ruled at national level without the help of a third, smaller party.
britons are now amazed that candidates who sharply criticised each other during the election campaign now stand together as colleagues to present a common platform to the public.
platform technical term - programme  proposed for action
vanished island
in the bay of bengal, between india and bangladesh, was an island 3.5 km long and 3 km wide. india called it new moore, and bangladesh called it south talpatti.
for 30 years both states have been in dispute over sovereignty of the island.
now however disputation is superfluous. because of the rise in sea level the island simply no longer exists.
that was confirmed by professor sugata hazra, professor of maritime studies at the university of calcutta, based on satellite photographs.
other countries too are threatened in the same way. the maldives, an archipelago in the indian ocean, will disappear under the sea if the world does nothing. last year president mohamed nasheed, wearing a diving suit, met with his cabinet 5 metres below the sea to draw attention to the problem.
in nepal, where there are many people and few trees, it is feared that the glaciers are melting, which will cause a catastrophe in the country.
barat : ancient indian king, alternative name for india
zamenhof to soros
"from zamenhof to soros" was the title of this year's symposium organized by the new y ork office of the universal esperanto- association.  this office organizes an annual public event on zamenhof day, the 15th of december.
the symposium was a historical overview of the beginning period of esperanto, organized in order to recognize two new books: the english language biography of zamenhof - a short version of the large biography written by a. korĵenkov two years ago ­ and the newly translated book by tivadar soros that was originally published in 1923.
renowned scholar esther schor, professor at princeton university, recognized the link with zamenhof in her discourse "zamenhof and the future" , where she examined the concept of the creator of esperanto regarding the future of humanity and the role of esperanto in this context.
urban foxes
among foxes in britain, who are not infected with rabies, since the second world war a tendency to urban life has been observed.
in towns l0 to 20 foxes per square kilometre live among us - ten times more than in the countryside.
most studied are the urban foxes in switzerland, whose numbers have grown fourfold since 1985. ten years ago zoologists, parasitologists and other researchers in zurich began the 'integrated fox project' which was concerned with studying all aspects of the foxes' life.
while badgers and chamois have only dared enter the suburbs, around a thousand foxes have already settled in the centre of zurich. most foxes in zurich are not immigrants, but were born there.
unlike rural foxes, who go around singly or in pairs, urban foxes live in large families. during the day they doze somewhere hidden.
if they show themselves, for many people that is a very enjoyable experience.